import { CodeComparison } from "@/components/ui/code-comparison";

# KU High School Design Competition 2024

## Background

The University of Kansas defines the competition as "a free event that takes
place annually in the fall, putting high school students' creativity, teamwork
skills, technical knowledge, and abilities to the test. Each High School Design
features new engineering design challenges in various engineering disciplines
created by students in the Self Engineering Leadership Fellows (SELF) Program.
Working as individuals or in small teams, high school students design, build,
and test a project that addresses the design criteria."

### The KU Design Challenge - Computer Science

Full Details can be found [here](https://engr.ku.edu/hsd-competition-details).

In summary:

Youâ€™re in a new city hired by an energy company that has lots of weather data
and needs summaries for the data gathered. You must present an application to
the energy company's' stakeholders (consists of customers, clients, and
investors). You must create a usable interface to query and describe data that
they would like to see. This includes, minimum, maximum, average, specific
points, and other related functions. The user must also be able to provide a
dataset programatically, either through command line, or user-interface.

Additionaly, there are extra features that can be completed for extra points.
These consist of the following, Connection to
[Open-Meteo](https://open-meteo.com/) external API, a generated histogram, a
set of RestfulAPI endpoints to allow external use of the application.

Finally, there will be an on-site hackathon in which 2 hours will be spent to
implement a mystery feature that is unknown until you enter the campus. At the
campus, you will also be expected to have lots of knowledge about your
application, and be able to present it.

## Design Choices

When brainstorming ideas for this competition, three ideas came to mind to build
this application.

- An application that could be invoked from the terminal that launches a CLI
  with a text based user interface, and returns text, or text based visuals.
- A webpage based application with a text based interface like ChatGPT and SQL,
  where you enter a prompt, and it returns either a text based response, or
  renders custom code for complicated responses, such as tables or hisotgrams.
- A webpage based application with a GUI based interface with buttons, inputs,
  and date-pickers and returns text based responses, or renders custom code for
  complicated responses, such as tables or hisotgrams.

After careful deliberation, I proceeded with the 2nd option, as I knew that I
would get the best of both worlds. I would have the tools available to build
complex outputs, like histograms, and also make the UX simple, with only having
one input that they need to manage.

## The First Iteration

After deciding on the basics of the application, I needed to make more decisions
about my application. What languages / frameworks was I going to build the
application with? What tools / libraries was I going to build with?

When building the application, I wanted to keep simplicity and low-barrier to
entry in mind. I wanted as little abstractions as possible, with very few
depencies. The first thing that came to mind was a Node.JS HTTP Server hosting
static HTML, CSS, and JS.

In the first iteration, I began with building a web-server. Coming from a
Next.JS background, I didn't think much of the complexity, set up a web-server
and return a response right? Wrong, you apparently need to handle a lot more
than that. You need to access the URL, parse it to get important bits, such as
the pathname, find the file on your system, parse the data, set the proper
headers, and then end the response. This was a big shock to me how complicated
this was, and I was shocked to see that Request and Response objects didn't
exist.

After building the sever, I proceed with the front-end. I started off with an
input at the bottom with a button right beside it. This was going to be the
start of my application. Here is where all of the queries would be entered and
sent from. I tested to ensure that the form was working as intented and all
values would be able to be parsed. I continued by implementing a query verifier
that would contain logic to verify that the query that was entered was a valid
query that could be parsed and sent to the server.

Proceeding these implementations, I worked on the functionality portion, and
implemented back-end logic and RestfulAPIs that could be accessed by anyone.
These implementations took me no time at all, as the implementation details
were very similar to that of the static files, where I must include header
information and other details that need to be sent to the client.

To wrap up the first iteration I implemented the auto-complete and added some
additional features such as the histogram and connection to an external data
source via a RestAPI.

## The Problems with the First Iteration

When building the first iteration, I came across a bug that I wasn't entirely
sure how to fix. When using [Open-Meteo](https://open-meteo.com/) I realized
quite quickly that I wasn't able to access any data, and the only error I
recieved was that the response took too long to respond. After careful
inspection and days of examination, I realized that the WiFi my computer
connects to, Blue Valley District WiFi, disallowed connections to this API. I
realize that connecting to a mobile hotspot allowed for the connections to go
through and data to be sent.

Another issue I ran into was a problem with my initial design philosophies and
initial construction of my code. The code I wrote was very cumbersome and hard
to follow. At the time, I had very little comments on what was going on in
specific functions and the code was very unorganized. One issue was that
Node.JS liked to overcomplicate the HTTP Server, and I knew of alternatives to
reduce the complexity. [Bun](https://bun.sh/)! Bun implemented tons of
additional features, such as `Bun.serve`, for web servers and loaded
applications up to 10x faster. With this idea in mind, I decided to rewrite my code and reiterate on a better, faster design.

Here is an example of the complexity of a Node.JS HTTP Server (before), and a
Bun Server with `Bun.serve` (after):

<CodeComparison
  beforeCode={`import http from "http";\nimport fs from "fs";\n\nconst PORT = 5000;\n\nconst server = http.createServer(async (req, res) => {\n\tconst reqURL = new URL(\n\t\treq.url == "/" ? "/index.html" : req.url ?? "/index.html",\n\t\t\`http://localhost:\${PORT}\`\n\t).pathname;\n\tif (reqURL.startsWith("/api/")) {\n\t\tawait handleAPI(reqURL, req, res);\n\t\treturn;\n\t}\n\tconst filePath = \`./src/frontend\${reqURL}\`;\n\ttry {\n\t\tconst file = fs.readFileSync(filePath, { encoding: "utf8" });\n\t\tif (filePath.endsWith(".html")) {\n\t\t\tres.setHeader("Content-Type", "text/html");\n\t\t} else if (filePath.endsWith(".css")) {\n\t\t\tres.setHeader("Content-Type", "text/css");\n\t\t} else if (filePath.endsWith(".js")) {\n\t\t\tres.setHeader("Content-Type", "text/javascript");\n\t\t} else if (filePath.endsWith(".svg")) {\n\t\t\tres.setHeader("Content-Type", "image/svg+xml");\n\t\t} else if (filePath.endsWith(".json")) {\n\t\t\tres.setHeader("Content-Type", "application/json");\n\t\t}\n\t\tres.end(file);\n\t} catch (err) {\n\t\tif (err.toString().includes("No such file or directory")) {\n\t\t\tres.statusCode = 404;\n\t\t\tres.end("404 - Content Not Found");\n\t\t} else {\n\t\t\tconsole.error(err);\n\t\t\tres.statusCode = 500;\n\t\t\tres.end("500 - Internal Server Error (check console)");\n\t\t}\n\t}\n});\n\nserver.listen(PORT, (error) => {\n\tif (error) {\n\t\treturn console.error(error);\n\t}\n\tconsole.log(\`Server is running on http://localhost:\${PORT}\`);\n});`}
  afterCode={`const PORT = 5000;\n\nBun.serve({\n\tport: PORT,\n\tasync fetch(/\* @type {Request} \*/ req) {\n\t\tconst path = new URL(req.url).pathname;\n\t\tlet debug = false;\n\t\tlet res;\n\t\tif (path.startsWith("/api/")) {\n\t\t\t// Handle API\n\t\t\tdebug = true;\n\t\t\tres = handleAPI(req, path);\n\t\t} else {\n\t\t\t// Handle Static Assets (index.html, index.css, index.js, /icons/...)\n\t\t\tres = handleStatic(req, path);\n\t\t}\n\t\t// If debug, show request + response\n\t\tdebug &&\n\t\t\tconsole.log(\n\t\t\t\t"\\x1b[32m -> \\x1b[0m" +\n\t\t\t\treq.method +\n\t\t\t\t" " +\n\t\t\t\tpath +\n\t\t\t\t" " +\n\t\t\t\t(await (await req).clone().text())\n\t\t\t);\n\t\tdebug &&\n\t\t\tconsole.log(\n\t\t\t\t"\\x1b[34m <- \\x1b[0m" +\n\t\t\t\treq.method +\n\t\t\t\t" " +\n\t\t\t\tpath +\n\t\t\t\t" " +\n\t\t\t\t(await (await res).clone().text())\n\t\t\t);\n\t\treturn res;\n\t},\n});`}
  language="javascript"
  filename="server.js"
  lightTheme="github-light"
  darkTheme="github-dark"
/>

## Building a second iteration

I knew after working in iteration 1, that it sufficed, but wasn't at all
pretty, I knew that I could keep most of my code the same, but something needed
to be done.

I started by installing [bun](https://bun.sh/) and migrating from Node.JS to
Bun. The only change that really happened was `node_module`s were installed and
a `bun.lockb` was created. I started by reworking `server.js` from the ground
up with some references and copies and pastes into the new server file, and
ensured that modifying the server bundle would be easy.

After rewriting, I realized that `index.js` on the front-end was carrying too
much weight and should also be rewritten. `index.js` was split into two
seperate files, `index.js`, the core of the application, and
`query-constants.js`, which contains countless constants, such as schemas and
icon registry for weather icons.

I started rewriting `index.js` from the ground up with many of the same ideas
as the first iteration, yet cleaner and more concise.

After rebuilding, I went to my teachers for suggestions. One of my teachers
advocated for some help instructions, as the program could be hard to use, and
encouraged me to include some help tips in the application. My other teacher,
advocated to implement custom code to have external weather data be queriable
via a zip-code, as not everyone knows their exact latitude and longitude.
Implementing this feature took some time, but allowed for quick iteration in
future implementations, such as inputing a city name, or in the case of the
hackathon, via the dataset.

## Competition Day!!!

The day of the competition, I didn't know what to expect. I didn't know what
other groups may have come up with, or even the littleist bit of information
about anything really. I just knew that what I had was good, at least, in my
eyes, but I didn't know what anyone else may had come up with.

### The Hackathon

The Hackathon was a 2 hour event located at KU, where you must implement a
mystery feature within the time provided. The feature request was to implement
a system to query the dataset and compare it with another range in the same
dataset. Implementing this type of feature caught me off guard, as I knew as
soon as I heard the feature, that I needed to rewrite most of my code because I
made an assumption earlier. The schema for what I wanted the query to look like
was `compare dataset [query1] [query2]`, and this went a little past what I was
expecting.

When building the application, I only anticipiated for a sub-query
to be at the end of the arguments list, and for their only to be one. If you
look, there are two subqueries. I spent the first half-hour of the hackathon,
panicking and attempting to implement this new feature, and realized that I
needed to restart from just before the hackathon, and reset. Rebuilding this
feature took most of my time, about 50 minutes of the 90 minutes that were
remaining. After implementing this, the rest of the challenge was easy. I just
needed to add a new query to the output checker and test both queries and
respond accordingly. The last half-hour I spent manually checking outputs and
ensuring that no other code broke, and I'm glad I did, as I realized some code
that had broken previously and slipped my rader.

### The Presentation

Waiting for my presentation was nerve-racking. I didn't know what to expect,
and wasn't sure if my application would hold up as well as I hoped. Preparing
for the presentation I almost entered the wrong room, and realized a few
seconds before I was supposed to enter. Eventually, I made it to the right
room, and entered semi-confidently. I didn't know what to expect, nor what
other groups may have built. I was greeted and told to set-up, and began
building my confidence. I presented my application, and things went very
smoothly and figured that things had gone right, and the panel really enjoyed
my presentation. I left happy with how everything went, and headed to lunch.

### The Results

Around 2:00, the closing ceremony began. This part included a conclustion and
results on placements. The Computer Science section was called first. In third
place, ... Barstow Knights from Barstow School. Okay, okay. In second place, ... Blue Flame from Blue Valley West High School. Yayyyy!!!! Everything that
occured after was a blur. I placed 2nd!!! (For reference 25 teams competed!)
I was really proud of myself, and my teachers, classmates, and parents that
helped me along this amazing journey. I was shocked.
